Add CIP for featured app activity markers (#1)
moritzkiefer-da/cips: cip-0046/cip-0046.md

<pre>

>   CIP: 0046

Author: Need to double check the number but I suggest we hold off on that until we're ready to make it a CIP in the public repo.

  Title: Featured App Reward Markers

>   Author: Moritz Kiefer <moritz.kiefer@digitalasset.com>

Author: is it ok for this to be me or should it be Eric?

>   License: CC-1.0

Author: @waynecollier-da Do you know if our legal team is OK with DA making CIPs under CC-1.0? I remember them not liking CC licenses but it seems to be the recommended license from CIP 00.

  Status: Draft
  Type: Tokenomics
  Created: 2025-02-06
</pre>

## Abstract

We propose introducing the ability for featured applications to create
app activity markers without transfering Canton Coin. An app activity
marker is equivalent to the existing app activity records created as

> part of a Canton Coin transfer with the amount being determined by a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
part of a Canton Coin transfer with a fixed amount that is determined by a
```

Or maybe "fixed" suggests that it cannot be changed? I'm trying to somehow allude to the fact that the app provider does not chose the amount, it's fixed at any point in time. Happy for other suggestions on how to achieve that.

Author: incorporated, we mention the parameter in the same sentence so I think there is no risk that people expect it to be non-changeable.

new governance parameter.

> To address this problem and allow rewarding applications that do not

Reviewer: > To address this problem and allow rewarding applications that do not

Hmmm... We haven't really introduced a "problem" in the above paragraph...
But perhaps we should indeed start with the problem. The problem is that apps that do not move CC do not currently get rewarded.

Author: Fixed, I've also moved the motivation above the specification section as well. I was trying to follow CIP 0 for that order but motiivation after specification just seems weird.

involve Canton Coin, we propose introducing the ability for any

> featured application (and only those) to create
> `FeaturedAppActivityMarker` contracts. These are then converted to a
> featured app activity record with the amount determined by a new
> governance parameter `featuredAppActivityMarkerAmount`.

Reviewer: IMHO this becomes too technical a bit too quickly.

```suggestion
featured application (and only those) to label transactions on the global synchronizer
as facilitated by that application. Technically speaking, this will be implemented by 
adding an ability for featured applications to create
`FeaturedAppActivityMarker` contracts. These are then converted to a
featured app activity record with the amount determined by a new
governance parameter `featuredAppActivityMarkerAmount`.
```

## Specification

### Overview

Featured applications get the ability to create

> `FeaturedAppActivityMarker` contracts has a constant value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`FeaturedAppActivityMarker` contracts, which have a constant value
```

determined by the newly introduced `featuredAppActivityMarkerAmount`

> that is chosen through governance votes by the super validators (the

Reviewer: Do we need to go into detail of how governance works here, e.g. the process (vote request vs something like the current coin price), and how the final value is chosen (e.g. voting on a specific value vs median of all proposals), or is that too low level for a CIP ?

Author: added a few details including that it's the same process used for extraFeatuerdAppRewardAmount.

default until changed is $1).

Automation run by the super validators converts these
`FeaturedAppActivityMarker` contracts into the existing
`AppRewardCoupon` contracts for the current open mining round with the

> $ amount determined by `featuredAppActivityMarkerAmount` and converted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
US Dollar amount determined by `featuredAppActivityMarkerAmount` and converted
```

to Canton Coin based on the Canton Coin conversion rate associated
with that mining round.

These `AppRewardCoupon` contracts can then be minted in the same
fashion as activity records originating from Canton Coin transfers. In
particular, they are minted from the existing minting pool/tranche for
application rewards.

> One transaction can create multiple markers for different providers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One transaction can contain multiple markers for different providers
```
?
(this is less about how they are created, more about the fact that a single transaction can be associated with multiple apps, right ?)

Author: I guess I'm sort of brainwashed by the fact that the event in the transactino is called a `CreatedEvent`. But let me change it to contains, probably clearer to a broader audience.

just as one transaction can contain multiple Canton Coin
transfers. This can be useful for composed applications where
e.g. both an exchange and a registry application should get rewards
for a DvP.

Featured application providers are expected to create featured

> application activity markers for transactions that correspond to a
> transfer or equivalent enabled by the application provider. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
application activity markers for transactions that correspond to a
transfer of an asset, or an equivalent transaction, which was 
enabled by the application provider. The
```

detailed fair usage policy and enforcement thereof is left up to the
tokenomics comittee.

### Details

A draft PR with all Daml changes is linked below in the [Reference implementation](#reference-implementation) section.

#### Core Daml Model

- A new template `FeaturedAppActivityMarker` is added that stores the provider party.

> - Add a choice `FeaturedAppRight_CreateActivityMarker` on the existing `FeaturedAppRight` to create a `FeaturedAppActivityMarker`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add a choice `FeaturedAppRight_CreateActivityMarker` on the existing `FeaturedAppRight` Daml template to create a `FeaturedAppActivityMarker`.
```

- Add a choice `AmuletRules_ConvertFeaturedAppActivityMarkers` that
  allows the SVs to convert `FeaturedAppActivityMarker` contracts into
  `AppRewardCoupon` contracts.

#### External Daml API

To allow applications to decouple themselves from the internal amulet models and reduce the impact of upgrades to those, an API based on [Daml interfaces](https://docs.daml.com/daml/reference/interfaces.html) is provided consisting of:

- An interface `Splice.Api.FeaturedAppRightV1.FeaturedAppRight` implemented by the existing `FeaturedAppRight` template.
- A choice `FeaturedAppRight_CreateActivityMarker` on that interface to create a marker contract.
- An interface `Splice.Api.FeaturedAppRightV1.FeaturedAppActivityMarker` implemented by the newly introduced `FeaturedAppActivityMarker` template.

## Motivation

Currently, as part of a Canton Coin transfer where the `provider`
party is set to a featured application provider, an activity record is
generated with the amount set to the amount of Canton Coin burned as
part of that transfer plus the `extraFeaturedAppRewardAmount` defined
in the `AmuletConfig` that the super validators voted on.

> This activity record can then be minted to Canton Coin rewarding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This activity record can then be used to mint Canton Coin rewarding
```

Canton Coin transfers into an application but that adds complexity
during application development (even more so for transactions
requiring external signing) and increases the size of the transaction
and traffic costs without a clear benefit.

Featured app activity markers address this by allowing applications to
generate activity records and mint featured application rewards
without the need to initiate Canton Coin Transfers.

## Rationale

### Alternatives considered

#### Artificial Canton Coin transfers

Applications that do not use Canton Coin could still add artificial
canton coin transfers to their application to generate application
activity records. However, this has a few downsides over the marker
contracts proposed in this CIP:

1. It adds additional complexity to applications to generate those
   transfers. Creating the marker contracts only depends on the
   `FeaturedAppRight` contract. A CC transfer requires a sender,
   receiver, some CC funds, access to an open mining round contract
   and access to amulet rules.
2. It increases traffic costs: A CC transfer is more complex not just
   in terms of code needed to create it but also in terms of

>    transaction size so it blows up the size of transactions. We
>    haven't done exact measurements on the increase though.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   transaction size so it blows up the size of transactions. 
```
I would remove this disclaimer.

3. Canton Coin transfers pin down the `OpenMiningRound` contract which
   is only active for ~20 minutes. This can limit their usage in
   combination with
   [external signing](https://github.com/DACH-NY/canton/blob/main/community/ledger-api/src/main/protobuf/com/daml/ledger/api/v2/interactive/README.md)
   as it does not allow for long delays between preparing a
   transaction and executing the signed transaction. While it is possible to circumvent this by splitting the transfer across two transactions where only the first one is externally signed this would then require those two-step flows in all applications.

#### Traffic-Based Activity Markers

This CIP proposes attributing a constant value to each activity marker
contract determined by `featuredAppActivityMarkerAmount`. Another
attractive option would be to instead make it proportional to the

> traffic costs payed for a transaction and we're aiming for that as a long-term option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
traffic costs payed for a transaction and that is a viable long-term option.
```
(just to not make it about our own plans)

However, this is a significantly more complex change that would delay
this feature for a potentially long time which is why we propose to go

> for the simple roption first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for the simpler option first.
```
